content/posts/cheatsheet.md, before:

---
title: index a CLI cheat sheet
date: 2023-09-07T23:38:11+02:00
draft: false
tags:
  - cmd
  - command
categories:
  - cheat sheet
cover:
  image: img/index.png
  alt: ""
  caption: ""
ShowToc: false
author:
  - Luca
---
# `index v1.0`
Welcome to *index*, we'll explore useful Command Line Interface (CLI) commands for troubleshooting with a focus on three these vendors: Cisco, Aruba, and Palo Alto.
I will try my best to keep this article up to date, incorporating the latest tips and commands.
## Cisco

### Troubleshooting Cisco 9800 SSO
Cisco 9800 SSO allows two Cisco 9800 Series Wireless LAN Controllers to work in an active-standby configuration, where one controller takes over if the other fails. This ensures uninterrupted network service for wireless clients. Run the commands below if any unexpected switchover was to happen:
```
term len 0
dir all | i cor
show proc cpu sorted | i CPU
show proc cpu platform sorted 1min
show chassis
show chassis ha-status local
show romvar
show redundancy
show redundancy switchover history
show redundancy history
sh log | i REDUNDANCY
show logging process stack_mgr internal
```
### 9800-CL VM scaling and profiling from [VM scaling guide](https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collateral/wireless/catalyst-9800-cl-wireless-controller-cloud/nb-06-cat9800-cl-wirel-cloud-dep-guide-cte-en.html)
When updating a controller, pay attention to the resources to allocate to it because they may increase from one version to another.
```
show platform software system all
```

To avoid stability and performance issues, it’s advisable **to fully reserve the vCPU** resources needed for the 9800-CL and never oversubscribe them. Hyperthreading is not supported and will need to be disabled on the host machine.

2 Starting from Cisco IOS XE Amsterdam 17.3.1, the required storage has increased from 8 GB to 16 GB. If upgrading to Cisco IOS XE Amsterdam 17.3.x from a previous release, the existing storage can be kept at 8 GB. For all new installations, it is required to go to 16 GB.
#### Cisco AP
##### Reset configuration
```
clear capwap private-config  
clear lwapp private-config  
reset
```
##### Unlock CLI commands like reload
It's an hidden command!
```
debug capwap console cli
```
##### Client channel bandwidth from access point
```
show controllers dot11Radio 1 client [MAC]
```

Refer to this [guide](https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/wireless/access_point/tech-notes/ap-radio-reset-codes.html) to dive into Radio Reset Codes or Radio RC stats.
#### AireOS terminal length to zero
```
config paging disable
config paging enable
```

Commit message:

Adding efficient upgrade and predowload utility

content/posts/cheatsheet.md, after:

---
title: index a CLI cheat sheet
date: 2023-09-07T23:38:11+02:00
draft: false
tags:
  - cmd
  - command
categories:
  - cheat sheet
cover:
  image: img/index.png
  alt: ""
  caption: ""
ShowToc: false
author:
  - Luca
---
# `index v1.0`
Welcome to *index*, we'll explore useful Command Line Interface (CLI) commands for troubleshooting with a focus on three these vendors: Cisco, Aruba, and Palo Alto.
I will try my best to keep this article up to date, incorporating the latest tips and commands.
## Cisco

### AP predowload and upgrade monitoring
Configuration > Tags > Flex > General > Efficient Image Upgrade

Configuration > Wireless > All Access Points > Select Action (top right) > AP Image Management > Predownload Image

Efficient Image upgrade is an efficient way of predownloading the image to the APs. It works similar to primary - subordinate model. An AP per model becomes the primary AP and downloads image from the controller through the WAN link. Once the primary AP has the downloaded image, the subordinate APs starts downloading the image from the primary AP. In this way, WAN latency is reduced. Primary AP selection is dynamic and random. A maximum of three subordinate APs per AP model can download the image from the primary AP.

The following output displays the primary AP.
```
show ap master list
```

The following output shows that the primary AP has started predownloading the image.
```
show ap image
```

To check if Flexefficient image upgrade is enabled in the AP, use the `show capwap client rcb` command on the AP console.


### Troubleshooting Cisco 9800 SSO
Cisco 9800 SSO allows two Cisco 9800 Series Wireless LAN Controllers to work in an active-standby configuration, where one controller takes over if the other fails. This ensures uninterrupted network service for wireless clients. Run the commands below if any unexpected switchover was to happen:
```
term len 0
dir all | i cor
show proc cpu sorted | i CPU
show proc cpu platform sorted 1min
show chassis
show chassis ha-status local
show romvar
show redundancy
show redundancy switchover history
show redundancy history
sh log | i REDUNDANCY
show logging process stack_mgr internal
```
### 9800-CL VM scaling and profiling from [VM scaling guide](https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collateral/wireless/catalyst-9800-cl-wireless-controller-cloud/nb-06-cat9800-cl-wirel-cloud-dep-guide-cte-en.html)
When updating a controller, pay attention to the resources to allocate to it because they may increase from one version to another.
```
show platform software system all
```

To avoid stability and performance issues, it’s advisable **to fully reserve the vCPU** resources needed for the 9800-CL and never oversubscribe them. Hyperthreading is not supported and will need to be disabled on the host machine.

2 Starting from Cisco IOS XE Amsterdam 17.3.1, the required storage has increased from 8 GB to 16 GB. If upgrading to Cisco IOS XE Amsterdam 17.3.x from a previous release, the existing storage can be kept at 8 GB. For all new installations, it is required to go to 16 GB.
#### Cisco AP
##### Reset configuration
```
clear capwap private-config  
clear lwapp private-config  
reset
```
##### Unlock CLI commands like reload
It's an hidden command!
```
debug capwap console cli
```
##### Client channel bandwidth from access point
```
show controllers dot11Radio 1 client [MAC]
```

Refer to this [guide](https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/td/docs/wireless/access_point/tech-notes/ap-radio-reset-codes.html) to dive into Radio Reset Codes or Radio RC stats.
#### AireOS terminal length to zero
```
config paging disable
config paging enable
```
